Frequency is the number of occurrences of a repeating event per unit of
time. Frequency is an important parameter used in science and
engineering to specify the rate of oscillatory and vibratory phenomena,
such as mechanical vibrations, audio signals (sound), radio waves, and
light.

The interval of time between events is called the period. It is the
reciprocal of the frequency. For example, if a heart beats at a
frequency of 120 times per minute (2 hertz), its period is one half of a
second.

Special definitions of frequency are used in certain contexts, such as
the angular frequency in rotational or cyclical properties, when the
rate of angular progress is measured. Spatial frequency is defined for
properties that vary or cccur repeatedly in geometry or space.

The unit of measurement of frequency in the International System of
Units (SI) is the hertz, having the symbol Hz.

Definitions and units 

For cyclical phenomena such as oscillations, waves, or for examples of
simple harmonic motion, the term frequency is defined as the number of
cycles or repetitions per unit of time. The conventional symbol for
frequency is f or ν (the Greek letter nu) is also used. The period T is
the time taken to complete one cycle of an oscillation or rotation. The
frequency and the period are related by the equation __MATH_367__

The term temporal frequency is used to emphasise that the frequency is
characterised by the number of occurrences of a repeating event per unit
time.

The SI unit of frequency is the hertz (Hz), named after the German
physicist Heinrich Hertz by the International Electrotechnical
Commission in 1930. It was adopted by the CGPM (Conférence générale des
poids et mesures) in 1960, officially replacing the previous name, cycle
per second (cps). The SI unit for the period, as for all measurements of
time, is the second. A traditional unit of frequency used with rotating
mechanical devices, where it is termed rotational frequency, is
revolution per minute, abbreviated r/min or rpm. Sixty rpm is equivalent
to one hertz.

Period versus frequency

As a matter of convenience, longer and slower waves, such as ocean
surface waves, are more typically described by wave period rather than
frequency. Short and fast waves, like audio and radio, are usually
described by their frequency. Some commonly used conversions are listed
below:

  Frequency         Period
  ----------------- ----------------
  1 mHz (10⁻³ Hz)   1 ks (10³ s)
  1 Hz (10⁰ Hz)     1 s (10⁰ s)
  1 kHz (10³ Hz)    1 ms (10⁻³ s)
  1 MHz (10⁶ Hz)    1 μs (10⁻⁶ s)
  1 GHz (10⁹ Hz)    1 ns (10⁻⁹ s)
  1 THz (10¹² Hz)   1 ps (10⁻¹² s)
                    

Related quantities

-   Rotational frequency, usually denoted by the Greek letter ν (nu), is
    defined as the instantaneous rate of change of the number of
    rotations, N, with respect to time: it is a type of frequency
    applied to rotational motion.
-   Angular frequency, usually denoted by the Greek letter ω (omega), is
    defined as the rate of change of angular displacement (during
    rotation), θ (theta), or the rate of change of the phase of a
    sinusoidal waveform (notably in oscillations and waves), or as the
    rate of change of the argument to the sine function:

    __MATH_368__ __MATH_369__
    The unit of angular frequency is the radian per second (rad/s) but,
    for discrete-time signals, can also be expressed as radians per
    sampling interval, which is a dimensionless quantity. Angular
    frequency is frequency multiplied by 2__MATH_370__.

-   Spatial frequency, denoted here by ξ (xi), is analogous to temporal
    frequency, but with a spatial measurement replacing time
    measurement, e.g.: __MATH_371__ __MATH_372__
    -   Spatial period or wavelength is the spatial analog to temporal
        period.

In wave propagation 

For periodic waves in nondispersive media (that is, media in which the
wave speed is independent of frequency), frequency has an inverse
relationship to the wavelength, λ (lambda). Even in dispersive media,
the frequency f of a sinusoidal wave is equal to the phase velocity v of
the wave divided by the wavelength λ of the wave: __MATH_373__

In the special case of electromagnetic waves in vacuum, then , where c
is the speed of light in vacuum, and this expression becomes
__MATH_374__

When monochromatic waves travel from one medium to another, their
frequency remains the same—only their wavelength and speed change.

Measurement

Measurement of frequency can be done in the following ways:

Counting

Calculating the frequency of a repeating event is accomplished by
counting the number of times that event occurs within a specific time
period, then dividing the count by the period. For example, if 71 events
occur within 15 seconds the frequency is: __MATH_375__ If the number of
counts is not very large, it is more accurate to measure the time
interval for a predetermined number of occurrences, rather than the
number of occurrences within a specified time. The latter method
introduces a random error into the count of between zero and one count,
so on average half a count. This is called gating error and causes an
average error in the calculated frequency of __MATH_376__, or a
fractional error of __MATH_377__ where __MATH_378__ is the timing
interval and __MATH_379__ is the measured frequency. This error
decreases with frequency, so it is generally a problem at low
frequencies where the number of counts N is small.

Stroboscope

An old method of measuring the frequency of rotating or vibrating
objects is to use a stroboscope. This is an intense repetitively
flashing light (strobe light) whose frequency can be adjusted with a
calibrated timing circuit. The strobe light is pointed at the rotating
object and the frequency adjusted up and down. When the frequency of the
strobe equals the frequency of the rotating or vibrating object, the
object completes one cycle of oscillation and returns to its original
position between the flashes of light, so when illuminated by the strobe
the object appears stationary. Then the frequency can be read from the
calibrated readout on the stroboscope. A downside of this method is that
an object rotating at an integer multiple of the strobing frequency will
also appear stationary.

Frequency counter

Higher frequencies are usually measured with a frequency counter. This
is an electronic instrument which measures the frequency of an applied
repetitive electronic signal and displays the result in hertz on a
digital display. It uses digital logic to count the number of cycles
during a time interval established by a precision quartz time base.
Cyclic processes that are not electrical, such as the rotation rate of a
shaft, mechanical vibrations, or sound waves, can be converted to a
repetitive electronic signal by transducers and the signal applied to a
frequency counter. As of 2018, frequency counters can cover the range up
to about 100 GHz. This represents the limit of direct counting methods;
frequencies above this must be measured by indirect methods.

Heterodyne methods

Above the range of frequency counters, frequencies of electromagnetic
signals are often measured indirectly utilizing heterodyning (frequency
conversion). A reference signal of a known frequency near the unknown
frequency is mixed with the unknown frequency in a nonlinear mixing
device such as a diode. This creates a heterodyne or "beat" signal at
the difference between the two frequencies. If the two signals are close
together in frequency the heterodyne is low enough to be measured by a
frequency counter. This process only measures the difference between the
unknown frequency and the reference frequency. To convert higher
frequencies, several stages of heterodyning can be used. Current
research is extending this method to infrared and light frequencies
(optical heterodyne detection).

Examples

Light

Visible light is an electromagnetic wave, consisting of oscillating
electric and magnetic fields traveling through space. The frequency of
the wave determines its color: 400 THz (__MATH_380__ Hz) is red light,
800 THz (__MATH_381__) is violet light, and between these (in the range
400–800 THz) are all the other colors of the visible spectrum. An
electromagnetic wave with a frequency less than __MATH_382__ will be
invisible to the human eye; such waves are called infrared (IR)
radiation. At even lower frequency, the wave is called a microwave, and
at still lower frequencies it is called a radio wave. Likewise, an
electromagnetic wave with a frequency higher than __MATH_383__ will also
be invisible to the human eye; such waves are called ultraviolet (UV)
radiation. Even higher-frequency waves are called X-rays, and higher
still are gamma rays.

All of these waves, from the lowest-frequency radio waves to the
highest-frequency gamma rays, are fundamentally the same, and they are
all called electromagnetic radiation. They all travel through vacuum at
the same speed (the speed of light), giving them wavelengths inversely
proportional to their frequencies. __MATH_384__ where c is the speed of
light (c in vacuum or less in other media), f is the frequency and λ is
the wavelength.

In dispersive media, such as glass, the speed depends somewhat on
frequency, so the wavelength is not quite inversely proportional to
frequency.

Sound

Sound propagates as mechanical vibration waves of pressure and
displacement, in air or other substances. In general, frequency
components of a sound determine its "color", its timbre. When speaking
about the frequency (in singular) of a sound, it means the property that
most determines its pitch.

The frequencies an ear can hear are limited to a specific range of
frequencies. The audible frequency range for humans is typically given
as being between about 20 Hz and 20,000 Hz (20 kHz), though the high
frequency limit usually reduces with age. Other species have different
hearing ranges. For example, some dog breeds can perceive vibrations up
to 60,000 Hz.

In many media, such as air, the speed of sound is approximately
independent of frequency, so the wavelength of the sound waves (distance
between repetitions) is approximately inversely proportional to
frequency.

Line current

In Europe, Africa, Australia, southern South America, most of Asia, and
Russia, the frequency of the alternating current in household electrical
outlets is 50 Hz (close to the tone G), whereas in North America and
northern South America, the frequency of the alternating current in
household electrical outlets is 60 Hz (between the tones B and B; that
is, a minor third above the European frequency). The frequency of the
'hum' in an audio recording can show in which of these general regions
the recording was made.

Aperiodic frequency

Aperiodic frequency is the rate of incidence or occurrence of non-cyclic
phenomena, including random processes such as radioactive decay. It is
expressed with the unit reciprocal second (s⁻¹) or, in the case of
radioactivity, with the unit becquerel.

It is defined as a rate, , involving the number of entities counted or
the number of events happened (N) during a given time duration (Δt); it
is a physical quantity of type temporal rate.
