In physics, motion is when an object changes its position with respect
to a reference point in a given time. Motion is mathematically described
in terms of displacement, distance, velocity, acceleration, speed, and
frame of reference to an observer, measuring the change in position of
the body relative to that frame with a change in time. The branch of
physics describing the motion of objects without reference to their
cause is called kinematics, while the branch studying forces and their
effect on motion is called dynamics.

If an object is not in motion relative to a given frame of reference, it
is said to be at rest, motionless, immobile, stationary, or to have a
constant or time-invariant position with reference to its surroundings.
Modern physics holds that, as there is no absolute frame of reference,
Isaac Newton's concept of absolute motion cannot be determined.
Everything in the universe can be considered to be in motion.

Motion applies to various physical systems: objects, bodies, matter
particles, matter fields, radiation, radiation fields, radiation
particles, curvature, and space-time. One can also speak of the motion
of images, shapes, and boundaries. In general, the term motion signifies
a continuous change in the position or configuration of a physical
system in space. For example, one can talk about the motion of a wave or
the motion of a quantum particle, where the configuration consists of
the probabilities of the wave or particle occupying specific positions.

Equations of motion

Can

Laws of motion

In physics, the motion of bodies is described through two related sets
of laws of mechanics. Classical mechanics for super atomic (larger than
an atom) objects (such as cars, projectiles, planets, cells, and humans)
and quantum mechanics for atomic and sub-atomic objects (such as helium,
protons, and electrons). Historically, Newton and Euler formulated three
laws of classical mechanics:

  ------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  First law:    In an inertial reference frame, an object either remains at rest or continues to move in a straight line at a constant velocity, unless acted upon by a net force.
  Second law:   In an inertial reference frame, the vector sum of the forces F on an object is equal to the mass m of that object multiplied by the acceleration a of the object: __MATH_350__. If the resultant force __MATH_351__ acting on a body or an object is not equal to zero, the body will have an acceleration __MATH_352__ that is in the same direction as the resultant force.
  Third law:    When one body exerts a force on a second body, the second body simultaneously exerts a force equal in magnitude and opposite in direction onto the first body.
  ------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Classical mechanics

Classical mechanics is used for describing the motion of macroscopic
objects moving at speeds significantly slower than the speed of light,
from projectiles to parts of machinery, as well as astronomical objects,
such as spacecraft, planets, stars, and galaxies. It produces very
accurate results within these domains and is one of the oldest and
largest scientific descriptions in science, engineering, and technology.

Classical mechanics is fundamentally based on Newton's laws of motion.
These laws describe the relationship between the forces acting on a body
and the motion of that body. They were first compiled by Sir Isaac
Newton in his work Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica, which
was first published on July 5, 1687. Newton's three laws are:

1.  A body at rest will remain at rest, and a body in motion will remain
    in motion unless it is acted upon by an external force. (This is
    known as the law of inertia.)
2.  Force (__MATH_353__) is equal to the change in momentum per change
    in time (__MATH_354__). For a constant mass, force equals mass times
    acceleration (__MATH_355__ ).
3.  For every action, there is an equal and opposite reaction. (In other
    words, whenever one body exerts a force __MATH_356__ onto a second
    body, (in some cases, which is standing still) the second body
    exerts the force __MATH_357__ back onto the first body. __MATH_358__
    and __MATH_359__ are equal in magnitude and opposite in direction.
    So, the body that exerts __MATH_360__ will be pushed backward.)

Newton's three laws of motion were the first to accurately provide a
mathematical model for understanding orbiting bodies in outer space.
This explanation unified the motion of celestial bodies and the motion
of objects on Earth.

Relativistic mechanics

Modern kinematics developed with study of electromagnetism and refers
all velocities __MATH_361__ to their ratio to speed of light
__MATH_362__. Velocity is then interpreted as rapidity, the hyperbolic
angle __MATH_363__ for which the hyperbolic tangent function
__MATH_364__. Acceleration, the change of velocity over time, then
changes rapidity according to Lorentz transformations. This part of
mechanics is special relativity. Efforts to incorporate gravity into
relativistic mechanics were made by W. K. Clifford and Albert Einstein.
The development used differential geometry to describe a curved universe
with gravity; the study is called general relativity.

Quantum mechanics

Quantum mechanics is a set of principles describing physical reality at
the atomic level of matter (molecules and atoms) and the subatomic
particles (electrons, protons, neutrons, and even smaller elementary
particles such as quarks). These descriptions include the simultaneous
wave-like and particle-like behavior of both matter and radiation energy
as described in the wave–particle duality.

In classical mechanics, accurate measurements and predictions of the
state of objects can be calculated, such as location and velocity. In
quantum mechanics, due to the Heisenberg uncertainty principle, the
complete state of a subatomic particle, such as its location and
velocity, cannot be simultaneously determined.

In addition to describing the motion of atomic level phenomena, quantum
mechanics is useful in understanding some large-scale phenomena such as
superfluidity, superconductivity, and biological systems, including the
function of smell receptors and the structures of protein.

Orders of magnitude

Humans, like all known things in the universe, are in constant motion;
however, aside from obvious movements of the various external body parts
and locomotion, humans are in motion in a variety of ways that are more
difficult to perceive. Many of these "imperceptible motions" are only
perceivable with the help of special tools and careful observation. The
larger scales of imperceptible motions are difficult for humans to
perceive for two reasons: Newton's laws of motion (particularly the
third), which prevents the feeling of motion on a mass to which the
observer is connected, and the lack of an obvious frame of reference
that would allow individuals to easily see that they are moving. The
smaller scales of these motions are too small to be detected
conventionally with human senses.

Universe

Spacetime (the fabric of the universe) is expanding, meaning everything
in the universe is stretching, like a rubber band. This motion is the
most obscure, not involving physical movement but a fundamental change
in the universe's nature. The primary source of verification of this
expansion was provided by Edwin Hubble who demonstrated that all
galaxies and distant astronomical objects were moving away from Earth,
known as Hubble's law, predicted by a universal expansion.

Galaxy

The Milky Way Galaxy is moving through space and many astronomers
believe the velocity of this motion to be approximately relative to the
observed locations of other nearby galaxies. Another reference frame is
provided by the Cosmic microwave background. This frame of reference
indicates that the Milky Way is moving at around .

Sun and Solar System

The Milky Way is rotating around its dense Galactic Center, thus the Sun
is moving in a circle within the galaxy's gravity. Away from the central
bulge, or outer rim, the typical stellar velocity is between . All
planets and their moons move with the Sun. Thus, the Solar System is in
motion.

Earth

The Earth is rotating or spinning around its axis. This is evidenced by
day and night, at the equator the earth has an eastward velocity of .
The Earth is also orbiting around the Sun in an orbital revolution. A
complete orbit around the Sun takes one year, or about 365 days; it
averages a speed of about .

Continents

The Theory of Plate tectonics tells us that the continents are drifting
on convection currents within the mantle, causing them to move across
the surface of the planet at the slow speed of approximately per year.
However, the velocities of plates range widely. The fastest-moving
plates are the oceanic plates, with the Cocos Plate advancing at a rate
of per year and the Pacific Plate moving per year. At the other extreme,
the slowest-moving plate is the Eurasian Plate, progressing at a typical
rate of about per year.

Internal body

The human heart is regularly contracting to move blood throughout the
body. Through larger veins and arteries in the body, blood has been
found to travel at approximately 0.33 m/s. Though considerable variation
exists, and peak flows in the venae cavae have been found between .
additionally, the smooth muscles of hollow internal organs are moving.
The most familiar would be the occurrence of peristalsis, which is where
digested food is forced throughout the digestive tract. Though different
foods travel through the body at different rates, an average speed
through the human small intestine is . The human lymphatic system is
also constantly causing movements of excess fluids, lipids, and immune
system related products around the body. The lymph fluid has been found
to move through a lymph capillary of the skin at approximately
0.0000097 m/s.

Cells

The cells of the human body have many structures and organelles that
move throughout them. Cytoplasmic streaming is a way in which cells move
molecular substances throughout the cytoplasm, various motor proteins
work as molecular motors within a cell and move along the surface of
various cellular substrates such as microtubules, and motor proteins are
typically powered by the hydrolysis of adenosine triphosphate (ATP), and
convert chemical energy into mechanical work. Vesicles propelled by
motor proteins have been found to have a velocity of approximately
0.00000152 m/s.

Particles

According to the laws of thermodynamics, all particles of matter are in
constant random motion as long as the temperature is above absolute
zero. Thus the molecules and atoms that make up the human body are
vibrating, colliding, and moving. This motion can be detected as
temperature; higher temperatures, which represent greater kinetic energy
in the particles, feel warm to humans who sense the thermal energy
transferring from the object being touched to their nerves. Similarly,
when lower temperature objects are touched, the senses perceive the
transfer of heat away from the body as a feeling of cold.

Subatomic particles

Within the standard atomic orbital model, electrons exist in a region
around the nucleus of each atom. This region is called the electron
cloud. According to Bohr's model of the atom, electrons have a high
velocity, and the larger the nucleus they are orbiting the faster they
would need to move. If electrons were to move about the electron cloud
in strict paths the same way planets orbit the Sun, then electrons would
be required to do so at speeds that would far exceed the speed of light.
However, there is no reason that one must confine oneself to this strict
conceptualization (that electrons move in paths the same way macroscopic
objects do), rather one can conceptualize electrons to be 'particles'
that capriciously exist within the bounds of the electron cloud. Inside
the atomic nucleus, the protons and neutrons are also probably moving
around due to the electrical repulsion of the protons and the presence
of angular momentum of both particles.

Light

Light moves at a speed of 299,792,458 m/s, or , in a vacuum. The speed
of light in vacuum (or __MATH_365__) is also the speed of all massless
particles and associated fields in a vacuum, and it is the upper limit
on the speed at which energy, matter, information or causation can
travel. The speed of light in vacuum is thus the upper limit for speed
for all physical systems.

In addition, the speed of light is an invariant quantity: it has the
same value, irrespective of the position or speed of the observer. This
property makes the speed of light c a natural measurement unit for speed
and a fundamental constant of nature.

In 2019, the speed of light was redefined alongside all seven SI base
units using what it calls "the explicit-constant formulation", where
each "unit is defined indirectly by specifying explicitly an exact value
for a well-recognized fundamental constant", as was done for the speed
of light. A new, but completely equivalent, wording of the metre's
definition was proposed: "The metre, symbol m, is the unit of length;
its magnitude is set by fixing the numerical value of the speed of light
in vacuum to be equal to exactly __MATH_366__ when it is expressed in
the SI unit ." This implicit change to the speed of light was one of the
changes that was incorporated in the 2019 revision of the SI, also
termed the New SI.

Superluminal motion

Some motion appears to an observer to exceed the speed of light. Bursts
of energy moving out along the relativistic jets emitted from these
objects can have a proper motion that appears greater than the speed of
light. All of these sources are thought to contain a black hole,
responsible for the ejection of mass at high velocities. Light echoes
can also produce apparent superluminal motion. This occurs owing to how
motion is often calculated at long distances; oftentimes calculations
fail to account for the fact that the speed of light is finite. When
measuring the movement of distant objects across the sky, there is a
large time delay between what has been observed and what has occurred,
due to the large distance the light from the distant object has to
travel to reach us. The error in the above naive calculation comes from
the fact that when an object has a component of velocity directed
towards the Earth, as the object moves closer to the Earth that time
delay becomes smaller. This means that the apparent speed as calculated
above is greater than the actual speed. Correspondingly, if the object
is moving away from the Earth, the above calculation underestimates the
actual speed.

Types of motion

-   Simple harmonic motion – motion in which the body oscillates in such
    a way that the restoring force acting on it is directly proportional
    to the body's displacement. Mathematically Force is directly
    proportional to the negative of displacement. Negative sign
    signifies the restoring nature of the force. (e.g., that of a
    pendulum).
-   Linear motion – motion that follows a straight linear path, and
    whose displacement is exactly the same as its trajectory. [Also
    known as rectilinear motion]
-   Reciprocal motion
-   Brownian motion – the random movement of very small particles
-   Circular motion
-   Rotatory motion – a motion about a fixed point. (e.g. Ferris wheel).
-   Curvilinear motion – It is defined as the motion along a curved path
    that may be planar or in three dimensions.
-   Rolling motion – (as of the wheel of a bicycle)
-   Oscillatory – (swinging from side to side)
-   Vibratory motion
-   Combination (or simultaneous) motions – Combination of two or more
    above listed motions
-   Projectile motion – uniform horizontal motion + vertical accelerated
    motion

Fundamental motions

-   Linear motion
-   Circular motion
-   Oscillation
-   Wave
-   Relative motion
-   Rotary motion
