In physics, angular frequency (symbol ω), also called angular speed and
angular rate, is a scalar measure of the angle rate (the angle per unit
time) or the temporal rate of change of the phase argument of a
sinusoidal waveform or sine function (for example, in oscillations and
waves). Angular frequency (or angular speed) is the magnitude of the
pseudovector quantity angular velocity.

Angular frequency can be obtained multiplying rotational frequency, ν
(or ordinary frequency, f) by a full turn (2 radians): . It can also be
formulated as , the instantaneous rate of change of the angular
displacement, θ, with respect to time, t.

Unit

In SI units, angular frequency is normally presented in the unit radian
per second. The unit hertz (Hz) is dimensionally equivalent, but by
convention it is only used for frequency f, never for angular
frequency ω. This convention is used to help avoid the confusion that
arises when dealing with quantities such as frequency and angular
quantities because the units of measure (such as cycle or radian) are
considered to be one and hence may be omitted when expressing quantities
in terms of SI units.

In digital signal processing, the frequency may be normalized by the
sampling rate, yielding the normalized frequency.

Examples

Circular motion

In a rotating or orbiting object, there is a relation between distance
from the axis, r, tangential speed, v, and the
angular frequency of the rotation. During one period, T, a
body in circular motion travels a distance vT. This distance
is also equal to the circumference of the path traced out by the body,
2πr. Setting these two quantities equal, and recalling the
link between period and angular frequency we obtain: ω= v/r.
Circular motion on the unit circle is given by ω= 2 π/T = 2 πf , where:

-   ω is the angular frequency (SI unit: radians per second),
-   T is the period (SI unit: seconds),
-   f is the ordinary frequency (SI unit: hertz).

Oscillations of a spring

An object attached to a spring can oscillate. If the spring is assumed
to be ideal and massless with no damping, then the motion is simple and
harmonic with an angular frequency given by ω= √(k/m), where

-   k is the spring constant,
-   m is the mass of the object.

ω is referred to as the natural angular frequency (sometimes be denoted
as ω₀).

As the object oscillates, its acceleration can be calculated by
a = -ω^2 x, where x is displacement from an equilibrium position.

Using standard frequency f, this equation would be a = -(2 πf)^2 x.

LC circuits

The resonant angular frequency in a series LC circuit equals the square
root of the reciprocal of the product of the capacitance (C, with SI
unit farad) and the inductance of the circuit (L, with SI unit henry):
ω= √(1/LC).

Adding series resistance (for example, due to the resistance of the wire
in a coil) does not change the resonant frequency of the series LC
circuit. For a parallel tuned circuit, the above equation is often a
useful approximation, but the resonant frequency does depend on the
losses of parallel elements.

Terminology

Although angular frequency is often loosely referred to as frequency, it
differs from frequency by a factor of 2π, which potentially
leads confusion when the distinction is not made clear.

References and notes

Related Reading:

-   

ca:Freqüència angular he:תדירות זוויתית
