In physics, a force is an influence that can cause an object to change
its velocity, unless counterbalanced by other forces, or its shape. In
mechanics, force makes ideas like 'pushing' or 'pulling' mathematically
precise. Because the magnitude and direction of a force are both
important, force is a vector quantity (force vector). The SI unit of
force is the newton (N), and force is often represented by the symbol
”'F”'.

Force plays an important role in classical mechanics. The concept of
force is central to all three of Newton's laws of motion. Types of
forces often encountered in classical mechanics include elastic,
frictional, contact or "normal" forces, and gravitational. The
rotational version of force is torque, which produces changes in the
rotational speed of an object. In an extended body, each part applies
forces on the adjacent parts; the distribution of such forces through
the body is the internal mechanical stress. In the case of multiple
forces, if the net force on an extended body is zero the body is in
equilibrium.

In modern physics, which includes relativity and quantum mechanics, the
laws governing motion are revised to rely on fundamental interactions as
the ultimate origin of force. However, the understanding of force
provided by classical mechanics is useful for practical purposes.

Development of the concept

Philosophers in antiquity used the concept of force in the study of
stationary and moving objects and simple machines, but thinkers such as
Aristotle and Archimedes retained fundamental errors in understanding
force. In part, this was due to an incomplete understanding of the
sometimes non-obvious force of friction and a consequently inadequate
view of the nature of natural motion. A fundamental error was the belief
that a force is required to maintain motion, even at a constant
velocity. Most of the previous misunderstandings about motion and force
were eventually corrected by Galileo Galilei and Sir Isaac Newton. With
his mathematical insight, Newton formulated laws of motion that were not
improved for over two hundred years.

By the early 20th century, Einstein developed a theory of relativity
that correctly predicted the action of forces on objects with increasing
momenta near the speed of light and also provided insight into the
forces produced by gravitation and inertia. With modern insights into
quantum mechanics and technology that can accelerate particles close to
the speed of light, particle physics has devised a Standard Model to
describe forces between particles smaller than atoms. The Standard Model
predicts that exchanged particles called gauge bosons are the
fundamental means by which forces are emitted and absorbed. Only four
main interactions are known: in order of decreasing strength, they are:
strong, electromagnetic, weak, and gravitational. High-energy particle
physics observations made during the 1970s and 1980s confirmed that the
weak and electromagnetic forces are expressions of a more fundamental
electroweak interaction.

Pre-Newtonian concepts

Since antiquity the concept of force has been recognized as integral to
the functioning of each of the simple machines. The mechanical advantage
given by a simple machine allowed for less force to be used in exchange
for that force acting over a greater distance for the same amount of
work. Analysis of the characteristics of forces ultimately culminated in
the work of Archimedes who was especially famous for formulating a
treatment of buoyant forces inherent in fluids.

Aristotle provided a philosophical discussion of the concept of a force
as an integral part of Aristotelian cosmology. In Aristotle's view, the
terrestrial sphere contained four elements that come to rest at
different "natural places" therein. Aristotle believed that motionless
objects on Earth, those composed mostly of the elements earth and water,
were in their natural place when on the ground, and that they stay that
way if left alone. He distinguished between the innate tendency of
objects to find their "natural place" (e.g., for heavy bodies to fall),
which led to "natural motion", and unnatural or forced motion, which
required continued application of a force. This theory, based on the
everyday experience of how objects move, such as the constant
application of a force needed to keep a cart moving, had conceptual
trouble accounting for the behavior of projectiles, such as the flight
of arrows. An archer causes the arrow to move at the start of the
flight, and it then sails through the air even though no discernible
efficient cause acts upon it. Aristotle was aware of this problem and
proposed that the air displaced through the projectile's path carries
the projectile to its target. This explanation requires a continuous
medium such as air to sustain the motion.

Though Aristotelian physics was criticized as early as the 6th century,
its shortcomings would not be corrected until the 17th century work of
Galileo Galilei, who was influenced by the late medieval idea that
objects in forced motion carried an innate force of impetus. Galileo
constructed an experiment in which stones and cannonballs were both
rolled down an incline to disprove the Aristotelian theory of motion. He
showed that the bodies were accelerated by gravity to an extent that was
independent of their mass and argued that objects retain their velocity
unless acted on by a force, for example friction. Galileo's idea that
force is needed to change motion rather than to sustain it, further
improved upon by Isaac Beeckman, René Descartes, and Pierre Gassendi,
became a key principle of Newtonian physics.

In the early 17th century, before Newton's Principia, the term "force"
() was applied to many physical and non-physical phenomena, e.g., for an
acceleration of a point. The product of a point mass and the square of
its velocity was named (live force) by Leibniz. The modern concept of
force corresponds to Newton's (accelerating force).

Newtonian mechanics

Sir Isaac Newton described the motion of all objects using the concepts
of inertia and force. In 1687, Newton published his magnum opus,
Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica. In this work Newton set out
three laws of motion that have dominated the way forces are described in
physics to this day. The precise ways in which Newton's laws are
expressed have evolved in step with new mathematical approaches.

First law

Newton's first law of motion states that the natural behavior of an
object at rest is to continue being at rest, and the natural behavior of
an object moving at constant speed in a straight line is to continue
moving at that constant speed along that straight line. The latter
follows from the former because of the principle that the laws of
physics are the same for all inertial observers, i.e., all observers who
do not feel themselves to be in motion. An observer moving in tandem
with an object will see it as being at rest. So, its natural behavior
will be to remain at rest with respect to that observer, which means
that an observer who sees it moving at constant speed in a straight line
will see it continuing to do so.

Second law

According to the first law, motion at constant speed in a straight line
does not need a cause. It is change in motion that requires a cause, and
Newton's second law gives the quantitative relationship between force
and change of motion. Newton's second law states that the net force
acting upon an object is equal to the rate at which its momentum changes
with time. If the mass of the object is constant, this law implies that
the acceleration of an object is directly proportional to the net force
acting on the object, is in the direction of the net force, and is
inversely proportional to the mass of the object.

A modern statement of Newton's second law is a vector equation:
𝐅 = d𝐩/dt, where 𝐩 is the momentum of the system, and
𝐅 is the net (vector sum) force. If a body is in equilibrium,
there is zero net force by definition (balanced forces may be present
nevertheless). In contrast, the second law states that if there is an
unbalanced force acting on an object it will result in the object's
momentum changing over time.

In common engineering applications the mass in a system remains constant
allowing as simple algebraic form for the second law. By the definition
of momentum, 𝐅 = d𝐩/dt = d(m𝐯)/dt, where m is the mass and 𝐯 is the
velocity. If Newton's second law is applied to a system of constant
mass, m may be moved outside the derivative operator. The equation then
becomes 𝐅 = md𝐯/dt. By substituting the definition of acceleration, the
algebraic version of Newton's second law is derived: 𝐅 =m𝐚.

Third law

Whenever one body exerts a force on another, the latter simultaneously
exerts an equal and opposite force on the first. In vector form, if
𝐅_1,2 is the force of body 1 on body 2 and 𝐅_2,1 that of body
2 on body 1, then 𝐅_1,2=-𝐅_2,1. This law is sometimes referred to as the
action-reaction law, with 𝐅_1,2 called the action and -𝐅_2,1
the reaction.

Newton's third law is a result of applying symmetry to situations where
forces can be attributed to the presence of different objects. The third
law means that all forces are interactions between different bodies. and
thus that there is no such thing as a unidirectional force or a force
that acts on only one body.

In a system composed of object 1 and object 2, the net force on the
system due to their mutual interactions is zero: 𝐅_1,2+𝐅_2,1=0. More
generally, in a closed system of particles, all internal forces are
balanced. The particles may accelerate with respect to each other but
the center of mass of the system will not accelerate. If an external
force acts on the system, it will make the center of mass accelerate in
proportion to the magnitude of the external force divided by the mass of
the system.

Combining Newton's second and third laws, it is possible to show that
the linear momentum of a system is conserved in any closed system. In a
system of two particles, if 𝐩_1 is the momentum of object 1 and
𝐩_2 the momentum of object 2, then d𝐩_1/dt + d𝐩_2/dt= 𝐅_1,2 + 𝐅_2,1 = 0 . Using similar
arguments, this can be generalized to a system with an arbitrary number
of particles. In general, as long as all forces are due to the
interaction of objects with mass, it is possible to define a system such
that net momentum is never lost nor gained.

Defining "force"

Some textbooks use Newton's second law as a definition of force.
However, for the equation 𝐅 = m𝐚 for a constant mass m to
then have any predictive content, it must be combined with further
information. Moreover, inferring that a force is present because a body
is accelerating is only valid in an inertial frame of reference. The
question of which aspects of Newton's laws to take as definitions and
which to regard as holding physical content has been answered in various
ways, which ultimately do not affect how the theory is used in practice.
Notable physicists, philosophers and mathematicians who have sought a
more explicit definition of the concept of force include Ernst Mach and
Walter Noll.

Combining forces

Forces act in a particular direction and have sizes dependent upon how
strong the push or pull is. Because of these characteristics, forces are
classified as "vector quantities". This means that forces follow a
different set of mathematical rules than physical quantities that do not
have direction (denoted scalar quantities). For example, when
determining what happens when two forces act on the same object, it is
necessary to know both the magnitude and the direction of both forces to
calculate the result. If both of these pieces of information are not
known for each force, the situation is ambiguous.

Historically, forces were first quantitatively investigated in
conditions of static equilibrium where several forces canceled each
other out. Such experiments demonstrate the crucial properties that
forces are additive vector quantities: they have magnitude and
direction. When two forces act on a point particle, the resulting force,
the resultant (also called the net force), can be determined by
following the parallelogram rule of vector addition: the addition of two
vectors represented by sides of a parallelogram, gives an equivalent
resultant vector that is equal in magnitude and direction to the
transversal of the parallelogram. The magnitude of the resultant varies
from the difference of the magnitudes of the two forces to their sum,
depending on the angle between their lines of action.

Free-body diagrams can be used as a convenient way to keep track of
forces acting on a system. Ideally, these diagrams are drawn with the
angles and relative magnitudes of the force vectors preserved so that
graphical vector addition can be done to determine the net force.

As well as being added, forces can also be resolved into independent
components at right angles to each other. A horizontal force pointing
northeast can therefore be split into two forces, one pointing north,
and one pointing east. Summing these component forces using vector
addition yields the original force. Resolving force vectors into
components of a set of basis vectors is often a more mathematically
clean way to describe forces than using magnitudes and directions. This
is because, for orthogonal components, the components of the vector sum
are uniquely determined by the scalar addition of the components of the
individual vectors. Orthogonal components are independent of each other
because forces acting at ninety degrees to each other have no effect on
the magnitude or direction of the other. Choosing a set of orthogonal
basis vectors is often done by considering what set of basis vectors
will make the mathematics most convenient. Choosing a basis vector that
is in the same direction as one of the forces is desirable, since that
force would then have only one non-zero component. Orthogonal force
vectors can be three-dimensional with the third component being at right
angles to the other two.

Equilibrium

When all the forces that act upon an object are balanced, then the
object is said to be in a state of equilibrium. Hence, equilibrium
occurs when the resultant force acting on a point particle is zero (that
is, the vector sum of all forces is zero). When dealing with an extended
body, it is also necessary that the net torque be zero. A body is in
static equilibrium with respect to a frame of reference if it at rest
and not accelerating, whereas a body in dynamic equilibrium is moving at
a constant speed in a straight line, i.e., moving but not accelerating.
What one observer sees as static equilibrium, another can see as dynamic
equilibrium and vice versa.

Static 

Static equilibrium was understood well before the invention of classical
mechanics. Objects that are not accelerating have zero net force acting
on them.

The simplest case of static equilibrium occurs when two forces are equal
in magnitude but opposite in direction. For example, an object on a
level surface is pulled (attracted) downward toward the center of the
Earth by the force of gravity. At the same time, a force is applied by
the surface that resists the downward force with equal upward force
(called a normal force). The situation produces zero net force and hence
no acceleration.

Pushing against an object that rests on a frictional surface can result
in a situation where the object does not move because the applied force
is opposed by static friction, generated between the object and the
table surface. For a situation with no movement, the static friction
force exactly balances the applied force resulting in no acceleration.
The static friction increases or decreases in response to the applied
force up to an upper limit determined by the characteristics of the
contact between the surface and the object.

A static equilibrium between two forces is the most usual way of
measuring forces, using simple devices such as weighing scales and
spring balances. For example, an object suspended on a vertical spring
scale experiences the force of gravity acting on the object balanced by
a force applied by the "spring reaction force", which equals the
object's weight. Using such tools, some quantitative force laws were
discovered: that the force of gravity is proportional to volume for
objects of constant density (widely exploited for millennia to define
standard weights); Archimedes' principle for buoyancy; Archimedes'
analysis of the lever; Boyle's law for gas pressure; and Hooke's law for
springs. These were all formulated and experimentally verified before
Isaac Newton expounded his three laws of motion.

Dynamic 

Dynamic equilibrium was first described by Galileo who noticed that
certain assumptions of Aristotelian physics were contradicted by
observations and logic. Galileo realized that simple velocity addition
demands that the concept of an "absolute rest frame" did not exist.
Galileo concluded that motion in a constant velocity was completely
equivalent to rest. This was contrary to Aristotle's notion of a
"natural state" of rest that objects with mass naturally approached.
Simple experiments showed that Galileo's understanding of the
equivalence of constant velocity and rest were correct. For example, if
a mariner dropped a cannonball from the crow's nest of a ship moving at
a constant velocity, Aristotelian physics would have the cannonball fall
straight down while the ship moved beneath it. Thus, in an Aristotelian
universe, the falling cannonball would land behind the foot of the mast
of a moving ship. When this experiment is actually conducted, the
cannonball always falls at the foot of the mast, as if the cannonball
knows to travel with the ship despite being separated from it. Since
there is no forward horizontal force being applied on the cannonball as
it falls, the only conclusion left is that the cannonball continues to
move with the same velocity as the boat as it falls. Thus, no force is
required to keep the cannonball moving at the constant forward velocity.

Moreover, any object traveling at a constant velocity must be subject to
zero net force (resultant force). This is the definition of dynamic
equilibrium: when all the forces on an object balance but it still moves
at a constant velocity. A simple case of dynamic equilibrium occurs in
constant velocity motion across a surface with kinetic friction. In such
a situation, a force is applied in the direction of motion while the
kinetic friction force exactly opposes the applied force. This results
in zero net force, but since the object started with a non-zero
velocity, it continues to move with a non-zero velocity. Aristotle
misinterpreted this motion as being caused by the applied force. When
kinetic friction is taken into consideration it is clear that there is
no net force causing constant velocity motion.

Examples of forces in classical mechanics 

Some forces are consequences of the fundamental ones. In such
situations, idealized models can be used to gain physical insight. For
example, each solid object is considered a rigid body.

Gravitational force or Gravity

What we now call gravity was not identified as a universal force until
the work of Isaac Newton. Before Newton, the tendency for objects to
fall towards the Earth was not understood to be related to the motions
of celestial objects. Galileo was instrumental in describing the
characteristics of falling objects by determining that the acceleration
of every object in free-fall was constant and independent of the mass of
the object. Today, this acceleration due to gravity towards the surface
of the Earth is usually designated as 𝐠 and has a magnitude of
about 9.81 meters per second squared (this measurement is taken from sea
level and may vary depending on location), and points toward the center
of the Earth. This observation means that the force of gravity on an
object at the Earth's surface is directly proportional to the object's
mass. Thus an object that has a mass of m will experience a
force: 𝐅 = m𝐠.

For an object in free-fall, this force is unopposed and the net force on
the object is its weight. For objects not in free-fall, the force of
gravity is opposed by the reaction forces applied by their supports. For
example, a person standing on the ground experiences zero net force,
since a normal force (a reaction force) is exerted by the ground upward
on the person that counterbalances his weight that is directed downward.

Newton's contribution to gravitational theory was to unify the motions
of heavenly bodies, which Aristotle had assumed were in a natural state
of constant motion, with falling motion observed on the Earth. He
proposed a law of gravity that could account for the celestial motions
that had been described earlier using Kepler's laws of planetary motion.

Newton came to realize that the effects of gravity might be observed in
different ways at larger distances. In particular, Newton determined
that the acceleration of the Moon around the Earth could be ascribed to
the same force of gravity if the acceleration due to gravity decreased
as an inverse square law. Further, Newton realized that the acceleration
of a body due to gravity is proportional to the mass of the other
attracting body. Combining these ideas gives a formula that relates the
mass (m_⊕) and the radius (R_⊕) of the Earth to the
gravitational acceleration: 𝐠=-Gm_⊕/R_⊕^2 r, where the vector direction is
given by r, is the unit vector directed outward from the
center of the Earth.

In this equation, a dimensional constant G is used to describe
the relative strength of gravity. This constant has come to be known as
the Newtonian constant of gravitation, though its value was unknown in
Newton's lifetime. Not until 1798 was Henry Cavendish able to make the
first measurement of G using a torsion balance; this was
widely reported in the press as a measurement of the mass of the Earth
since knowing G could allow one to solve for the Earth's mass
given the above equation. Newton realized that since all celestial
bodies followed the same laws of motion, his law of gravity had to be
universal. Succinctly stated, Newton's law of gravitation states that
the force on a spherical object of mass m_1 due to the
gravitational pull of mass m_2 is 𝐅=-Gm_1m_2/r^2 r, where r
is the distance between the two objects' centers of mass and r
is the unit vector pointed in the direction away from the center of the
first object toward the center of the second object.

This formula was powerful enough to stand as the basis for all
subsequent descriptions of motion within the Solar System until the 20th
century. During that time, sophisticated methods of perturbation
analysis were invented to calculate the deviations of orbits due to the
influence of multiple bodies on a planet, moon, comet, or asteroid. The
formalism was exact enough to allow mathematicians to predict the
existence of the planet Neptune before it was observed.

Electromagnetic

The electrostatic force was first described in 1784 by Coulomb as a
force that existed intrinsically between two charges. The properties of
the electrostatic force were that it varied as an inverse square law
directed in the radial direction, was both attractive and repulsive
(there was intrinsic polarity), was independent of the mass of the
charged objects, and followed the superposition principle. Coulomb's law
unifies all these observations into one succinct statement.

Subsequent mathematicians and physicists found the construct of the
electric field to be useful for determining the electrostatic force on
an electric charge at any point in space. The electric field was based
on using a hypothetical "test charge" anywhere in space and then using
Coulomb's Law to determine the electrostatic force. Thus the electric
field anywhere in space is defined as 𝐄 = 𝐅 q, where q is
the magnitude of the hypothetical test charge. Similarly, the idea of
the magnetic field was introduced to express how magnets can influence
one another at a distance. The Lorentz force law gives the force upon a
body with charge q due to electric and magnetic fields:
𝐅 = q(𝐄 + 𝐯 ×𝐁), where 𝐅 is the electromagnetic force, 𝐄
is the electric field at the body's location, 𝐁 is the
magnetic field, and 𝐯 is the velocity of the particle. The
magnetic contribution to the Lorentz force is the cross product of the
velocity vector with the magnetic field.

The origin of electric and magnetic fields would not be fully explained
until 1864 when James Clerk Maxwell unified a number of earlier theories
into a set of 20 scalar equations, which were later reformulated into 4
vector equations by Oliver Heaviside and Josiah Willard Gibbs. These
"Maxwell's equations" fully described the sources of the fields as being
stationary and moving charges, and the interactions of the fields
themselves. This led Maxwell to discover that electric and magnetic
fields could be "self-generating" through a wave that traveled at a
speed that he calculated to be the speed of light. This insight united
the nascent fields of electromagnetic theory with optics and led
directly to a complete description of the electromagnetic spectrum.

Normal

When objects are in contact, the force directly between them is called
the normal force, the component of the total force in the system exerted
normal to the interface between the objects. The normal force is closely
related to Newton's third law. The normal force, for example, is
responsible for the structural integrity of tables and floors as well as
being the force that responds whenever an external force pushes on a
solid object. An example of the normal force in action is the impact
force on an object crashing into an immobile surface.

Friction

Friction is a force that opposes relative motion of two bodies. At the
macroscopic scale, the frictional force is directly related to the
normal force at the point of contact. There are two broad
classifications of frictional forces: static friction and kinetic
friction.

The static friction force (𝐅_sf) will exactly oppose forces
applied to an object parallel to a surface up to the limit specified by
the coefficient of static friction (μ_sf) multiplied by the
normal force (𝐅_N). In other words, the magnitude of the static
friction force satisfies the inequality: 0 ≤𝐅_sf ≤μ_sf 𝐅_N.

The kinetic friction force (F_kf) is typically independent of
both the forces applied and the movement of the object. Thus, the
magnitude of the force equals: 𝐅_kf = μ_kf 𝐅_N,

where μ_kf is the coefficient of kinetic friction. The
coefficient of kinetic friction is normally less than the coefficient of
static friction.

Tension

Tension forces can be modeled using ideal strings that are massless,
frictionless, unbreakable, and do not stretch. They can be combined with
ideal pulleys, which allow ideal strings to switch physical direction.
Ideal strings transmit tension forces instantaneously in action–reaction
pairs so that if two objects are connected by an ideal string, any force
directed along the string by the first object is accompanied by a force
directed along the string in the opposite direction by the second
object. By connecting the same string multiple times to the same object
through the use of a configuration that uses movable pulleys, the
tension force on a load can be multiplied. For every string that acts on
a load, another factor of the tension force in the string acts on the
load. Such machines allow a mechanical advantage for a corresponding
increase in the length of displaced string needed to move the load.
These tandem effects result ultimately in the conservation of mechanical
energy since the work done on the load is the same no matter how
complicated the machine.

Spring

A simple elastic force acts to return a spring to its natural length. An
ideal spring is taken to be massless, frictionless, unbreakable, and
infinitely stretchable. Such springs exert forces that push when
contracted, or pull when extended, in proportion to the displacement of
the spring from its equilibrium position. This linear relationship was
described by Robert Hooke in 1676, for whom Hooke's law is named. If
Δx is the displacement, the force exerted by an ideal spring
equals: 𝐅=-k Δ𝐱, where k is the spring constant (or force
constant), which is particular to the spring. The minus sign accounts
for the tendency of the force to act in opposition to the applied load.

Centripetal

For an object in uniform circular motion, the net force acting on the
object equals: 𝐅 = - mv^2/rr, where m is the mass of the object,
v is the velocity of the object and r is the
distance to the center of the circular path and r is the unit
vector pointing in the radial direction outwards from the center. This
means that the net force felt by the object is always directed toward
the center of the curving path. Such forces act perpendicular to the
velocity vector associated with the motion of an object, and therefore
do not change the speed of the object (magnitude of the velocity), but
only the direction of the velocity vector. More generally, the net force
that accelerates an object can be resolved into a component that is
perpendicular to the path, and one that is tangential to the path. This
yields both the tangential force, which accelerates the object by either
slowing it down or speeding it up, and the radial (centripetal) force,
which changes its direction.

Continuum mechanics

Newton's laws and Newtonian mechanics in general were first developed to
describe how forces affect idealized point particles rather than
three-dimensional objects. In real life, matter has extended structure
and forces that act on one part of an object might affect other parts of
an object. For situations where lattice holding together the atoms in an
object is able to flow, contract, expand, or otherwise change shape, the
theories of continuum mechanics describe the way forces affect the
material. For example, in extended fluids, differences in pressure
result in forces being directed along the pressure gradients as follows:
𝐅/V = - ∇ P,

where V is the volume of the object in the fluid and
P is the scalar function that describes the pressure at all
locations in space. Pressure gradients and differentials result in the
buoyant force for fluids suspended in gravitational fields, winds in
atmospheric science, and the lift associated with aerodynamics and
flight.

A specific instance of such a force that is associated with dynamic
pressure is fluid resistance: a body force that resists the motion of an
object through a fluid due to viscosity. For so-called "Stokes' drag"
the force is approximately proportional to the velocity, but opposite in
direction: 𝐅_d = - b 𝐯, where:

-   b is a constant that depends on the properties of the
    fluid and the dimensions of the object (usually the cross-sectional
    area), and
-   𝐯 is the velocity of the object.

More formally, forces in continuum mechanics are fully described by a
stress tensor with terms that are roughly defined as σ= F/A, where
A is the relevant cross-sectional area for the volume for
which the stress tensor is being calculated. This formalism includes
pressure terms associated with forces that act normal to the
cross-sectional area (the matrix diagonals of the tensor) as well as
shear terms associated with forces that act parallel to the
cross-sectional area (the off-diagonal elements). The stress tensor
accounts for forces that cause all strains (deformations) including also
tensile stresses and compressions.

Fictitious

There are forces that are frame dependent, meaning that they appear due
to the adoption of non-Newtonian (that is, non-inertial) reference
frames. Such forces include the centrifugal force and the Coriolis
force. These forces are considered fictitious because they do not exist
in frames of reference that are not accelerating. Because these forces
are not genuine they are also referred to as "pseudo forces".

In general relativity, gravity becomes a fictitious force that arises in
situations where spacetime deviates from a flat geometry.

Concepts derived from force

Rotation and torque

Forces that cause extended objects to rotate are associated with
torques. Mathematically, the torque of a force 𝐅 is defined
relative to an arbitrary reference point as the cross product:
τ= 𝐫 ×𝐅, where 𝐫 is the position vector of the force
application point relative to the reference point.

Torque is the rotation equivalent of force in the same way that angle is
the rotational equivalent for position, angular velocity for velocity,
and angular momentum for momentum. As a consequence of Newton's first
law of motion, there exists rotational inertia that ensures that all
bodies maintain their angular momentum unless acted upon by an
unbalanced torque. Likewise, Newton's second law of motion can be used
to derive an analogous equation for the instantaneous angular
acceleration of the rigid body: τ= Iα, where

-   I is the moment of inertia of the body
-   α is the angular acceleration of the body.

This provides a definition for the moment of inertia, which is the
rotational equivalent for mass. In more advanced treatments of
mechanics, where the rotation over a time interval is described, the
moment of inertia must be substituted by the tensor that, when properly
analyzed, fully determines the characteristics of rotations including
precession and nutation.

Equivalently, the differential form of Newton's second law provides an
alternative definition of torque: τ= d𝐋/dt, where 𝐋 is the
angular momentum of the particle.

Newton's third law of motion requires that all objects exerting torques
themselves experience equal and opposite torques, and therefore also
directly implies the conservation of angular momentum for closed systems
that experience rotations and revolutions through the action of internal
torques.

Yank

The yank is defined as the rate of change of force

    𝐘 = d𝐅/dt

The term is used in biomechanical analysis, athletic assessment and
robotic control. The second ("tug"), third ("snatch"), fourth ("shake"),
and higher derivatives are rarely used.

Kinematic integrals

Forces can be used to define a number of physical concepts by
integrating with respect to kinematic variables. For example,
integrating with respect to time gives the definition of impulse:
𝐉=∫_t_1^t_2𝐅   dt, which by Newton's second law must be equivalent to the
change in momentum (yielding the Impulse momentum theorem).

Similarly, integrating with respect to position gives a definition for
the work done by a force: W= ∫_𝐱_1^𝐱_2 𝐅 ·d𝐱, which is equivalent to changes in
kinetic energy (yielding the work energy theorem).

Power P is the rate of change dW/dt of the work W, as the trajectory is
extended by a position change d𝐱 in a time interval dt:
dW = dW/d𝐱 ·d𝐱 = 𝐅 ·d𝐱, so P = dW/dt = dW/d𝐱 ·d𝐱/dt = 𝐅 ·𝐯, with 𝐯 = d𝐱/dt the velocity.

Potential energy

Instead of a force, often the mathematically related concept of a
potential energy field is used. For instance, the gravitational force
acting upon an object can be seen as the action of the gravitational
field that is present at the object's location. Restating mathematically
the definition of energy (via the definition of work), a potential
scalar field U(𝐫) is defined as that field whose gradient is
equal and opposite to the force produced at every point: 𝐅=-∇ U.

Forces can be classified as conservative or nonconservative.
Conservative forces are equivalent to the gradient of a potential while
nonconservative forces are not.

Conservation

A conservative force that acts on a closed system has an associated
mechanical work that allows energy to convert only between kinetic or
potential forms. This means that for a closed system, the net mechanical
energy is conserved whenever a conservative force acts on the system.
The force, therefore, is related directly to the difference in potential
energy between two different locations in space, and can be considered
to be an artifact of the potential field in the same way that the
direction and amount of a flow of water can be considered to be an
artifact of the contour map of the elevation of an area.

Conservative forces include gravity, the electromagnetic force, and the
spring force. Each of these forces has models that are dependent on a
position often given as a radial vector 𝐫 emanating from
spherically symmetric potentials. Examples of this follow:

For gravity: 𝐅_g = - G m_1 m_2/r^2 r, where G is the gravitational
constant, and m_n is the mass of object n.

For electrostatic forces: 𝐅_e = q_1 q_2/4 πε_0 r^2 r, where ε_0 is electric
permittivity of free space, and q_n is the electric charge of
object n.

For spring forces: 𝐅_s = -krr, where k is the spring constant.

For certain physical scenarios, it is impossible to model forces as
being due to a simple gradient of potentials. This is often due a
macroscopic statistical average of microstates. For example, static
friction is caused by the gradients of numerous electrostatic potentials
between the atoms, but manifests as a force model that is independent of
any macroscale position vector. Nonconservative forces other than
friction include other contact forces, tension, compression, and drag.
For any sufficiently detailed description, all these forces are the
results of conservative ones since each of these macroscopic forces are
the net results of the gradients of microscopic potentials.

The connection between macroscopic nonconservative forces and
microscopic conservative forces is described by detailed treatment with
statistical mechanics. In macroscopic closed systems, nonconservative
forces act to change the internal energies of the system, and are often
associated with the transfer of heat. According to the Second law of
thermodynamics, nonconservative forces necessarily result in energy
transformations within closed systems from ordered to more random
conditions as entropy increases.

Units

The SI unit of force is the newton (symbol N), which is the force
required to accelerate a one kilogram mass at a rate of one meter per
second squared, or kg·m·s⁻².The corresponding CGS unit is the dyne, the
force required to accelerate a one gram mass by one centimeter per
second squared, or g·cm·s⁻². A newton is thus equal to 100,000 dynes.

The gravitational foot-pound-second English unit of force is the
pound-force (lbf), defined as the force exerted by gravity on a
pound-mass in the standard gravitational field of 9.80665 m·s⁻². The
pound-force provides an alternative unit of mass: one slug is the mass
that will accelerate by one foot per second squared when acted on by one
pound-force. An alternative unit of force in a different
foot–pound–second system, the absolute fps system, is the poundal,
defined as the force required to accelerate a one-pound mass at a rate
of one foot per second squared.

The pound-force has a metric counterpart, less commonly used than the
newton: the kilogram-force (kgf) (sometimes kilopond), is the force
exerted by standard gravity on one kilogram of mass. The kilogram-force
leads to an alternate, but rarely used unit of mass: the metric slug
(sometimes mug or hyl) is that mass that accelerates at 1 m·s⁻² when
subjected to a force of 1 kgf. The kilogram-force is not a part of the
modern SI system, and is generally deprecated, sometimes used for
expressing aircraft weight, jet thrust, bicycle spoke tension, torque
wrench settings and engine output torque.

    See also Ton-force.

Revisions of the force concept

At the beginning of the 20th century, new physical ideas emerged to
explain experimental results in astronomical and submicroscopic realms.
As discussed below, relativity alters the definition of momentum and
quantum mechanics reuses the concept of "force" in microscopic contexts
where Newton's laws do not apply directly.

Special theory of relativity

In the special theory of relativity, mass and energy are equivalent (as
can be seen by calculating the work required to accelerate an object).
When an object's velocity increases, so does its energy and hence its
mass equivalent (inertia). It thus requires more force to accelerate it
the same amount than it did at a lower velocity. Newton's second law,
𝐅 = d𝐩/dt, remains valid because it is a mathematical definition. But
for momentum to be conserved at relativistic relative velocity,
v, momentum must be redefined as: 𝐩 = m_0𝐯/√(1 - v^2/c^2) , where
m_0 is the rest mass and c the speed of light.

The expression relating force and acceleration for a particle with
constant non-zero rest mass m moving in the x
direction at velocity v is: 𝐅 = (γ^3 m a_x, γm a_y, γm a_z), where γ= 1/√(1 - v^2/c^2). is
called the Lorentz factor. The Lorentz factor increases steeply as the
relative velocity approaches the speed of light. Consequently, the
greater and greater force must be applied to produce the same
acceleration at extreme velocity. The relative velocity cannot reach
c. If v is very small compared to c,
then γ is very close to 1 and 𝐅 = m𝐚 is a close
approximation. Even for use in relativity, one can restore the form of
F^μ= mA^μ through the use of four-vectors. This relation is correct
in relativity when F^μ is the four-force, m is the
invariant mass, and A^μ is the four-acceleration.

The general theory of relativity incorporates a more radical departure
from the Newtonian way of thinking about force, specifically
gravitational force. This reimagining of the nature of gravity is
described more fully below.

Quantum mechanics

Quantum mechanics is a theory of physics originally developed in order
to understand microscopic phenomena: behavior at the scale of molecules,
atoms or subatomic particles. Generally and loosely speaking, the
smaller a system is, the more an adequate mathematical model will
require understanding quantum effects. The conceptual underpinning of
quantum physics is different from that of classical physics. Instead of
thinking about quantities like position, momentum, and energy as
properties that an object has, one considers what result might appear
when a measurement of a chosen type is performed. Quantum mechanics
allows the physicist to calculate the probability that a chosen
measurement will elicit a particular result. The expectation value for a
measurement is the average of the possible results it might yield,
weighted by their probabilities of occurrence.

In quantum mechanics, interactions are typically described in terms of
energy rather than force. The Ehrenfest theorem provides a connection
between quantum expectation values and the classical concept of force, a
connection that is necessarily inexact, as quantum physics is
fundamentally different from classical. In quantum physics, the Born
rule is used to calculate the expectation values of a position
measurement or a momentum measurement. These expectation values will
generally change over time; that is, depending on the time at which (for
example) a position measurement is performed, the probabilities for its
different possible outcomes will vary. The Ehrenfest theorem says,
roughly speaking, that the equations describing how these expectation
values change over time have a form reminiscent of Newton's second law,
with a force defined as the negative derivative of the potential energy.
However, the more pronounced quantum effects are in a given situation,
the more difficult it is to derive meaningful conclusions from this
resemblance.

Quantum mechanics also introduces two new constraints that interact with
forces at the submicroscopic scale and which are especially important
for atoms. Despite the strong attraction of the nucleus, the uncertainty
principle limits the minimum extent of an electron probability
distribution and the Pauli exclusion principle prevents electrons from
sharing the same probability distribution. This gives rise to an
emergent pressure known as degeneracy pressure. The dynamic equilibrium
between the degeneracy pressure and the attractive electromagnetic force
give atoms, molecules, liquids, and solids stability.

Quantum field theory

In modern particle physics, forces and the acceleration of particles are
explained as a mathematical by-product of exchange of momentum-carrying
gauge bosons. With the development of quantum field theory and general
relativity, it was realized that force is a redundant concept arising
from conservation of momentum (4-momentum in relativity and momentum of
virtual particles in quantum electrodynamics). The conservation of
momentum can be directly derived from the homogeneity or symmetry of
space and so is usually considered more fundamental than the concept of
a force. Thus the currently known fundamental forces are considered more
accurately to be "fundamental interactions".

While sophisticated mathematical descriptions are needed to predict, in
full detail, the result of such interactions, there is a conceptually
simple way to describe them through the use of Feynman diagrams. In a
Feynman diagram, each matter particle is represented as a straight line
(see world line) traveling through time, which normally increases up or
to the right in the diagram. Matter and anti-matter particles are
identical except for their direction of propagation through the Feynman
diagram. World lines of particles intersect at interaction vertices, and
the Feynman diagram represents any force arising from an interaction as
occurring at the vertex with an associated instantaneous change in the
direction of the particle world lines. Gauge bosons are emitted away
from the vertex as wavy lines and, in the case of virtual particle
exchange, are absorbed at an adjacent vertex. The utility of Feynman
diagrams is that other types of physical phenomena that are part of the
general picture of fundamental interactions but are conceptually
separate from forces can also be described using the same rules. For
example, a Feynman diagram can describe in succinct detail how a neutron
decays into an electron, proton, and antineutrino, an interaction
mediated by the same gauge boson that is responsible for the weak
nuclear force.

Fundamental interactions

All of the known forces of the universe are classified into four
fundamental interactions. The strong and the weak forces act only at
very short distances, and are responsible for the interactions between
subatomic particles, including nucleons and compound nuclei. The
electromagnetic force acts between electric charges, and the
gravitational force acts between masses. All other forces in nature
derive from these four fundamental interactions operating within quantum
mechanics, including the constraints introduced by the Schrödinger
equation and the Pauli exclusion principle. For example, friction is a
manifestation of the electromagnetic force acting between atoms of two
surfaces. The forces in springs, modeled by Hooke's law, are also the
result of electromagnetic forces. Centrifugal forces are acceleration
forces that arise simply from the acceleration of rotating frames of
reference.

The fundamental theories for forces developed from the unification of
different ideas. For example, Newton's universal theory of gravitation
showed that the force responsible for objects falling near the surface
of the Earth is also the force responsible for the falling of celestial
bodies about the Earth (the Moon) and around the Sun (the planets).
Michael Faraday and James Clerk Maxwell demonstrated that electric and
magnetic forces were unified through a theory of electromagnetism. In
the 20th century, the development of quantum mechanics led to a modern
understanding that the first three fundamental forces (all except
gravity) are manifestations of matter (fermions) interacting by
exchanging virtual particles called gauge bosons. This Standard Model of
particle physics assumes a similarity between the forces and led
scientists to predict the unification of the weak and electromagnetic
forces in electroweak theory, which was subsequently confirmed by
observation.

+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Property/   | Gravitation | Weak        | Elec        | Strong      |
| Interaction |             |             | tromagnetic |             |
+=============+=============+=============+=============+=============+
| (E          |             | Fundamental | Residual    |             |
| lectroweak) |             |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Acts on:    | Mass -      | Flavor      | Electric    | Color       |
|             | Energy      |             | charge      | charge      |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Particles   | All         | Quarks,     | E           | Quarks,     |
| ex          |             | leptons     | lectrically | Gluons      |
| periencing: |             |             | charged     |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Particles   | Graviton    | W⁺ W⁻ Z⁰    | γ           | Gluons      |
| mediating:  | (not yet    |             |             |             |
|             | observed)   |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Strength in | _           | _           | 1           | 60          |
| the scale   | _MATH_110__ | _MATH_111__ |             |             |
| of quarks:  |             |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Strength in | _           | _           | 1           | Not         |
| the scale   | _MATH_112__ | _MATH_113__ |             | applicable  |
| of          |             |             |             | to hadrons  |
| proton      |             |             |             |             |
| s/neutrons: |             |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+

: The four fundamental forces of nature[1]

Gravitational

Newton's law of gravitation is an example of action at a distance: one
body, like the Sun, exerts an influence upon any other body, like the
Earth, no matter how far apart they are. Moreover, this action at a
distance is instantaneous. According to Newton's theory, the one body
shifting position changes the gravitational pulls felt by all other
bodies, all at the same instant of time. Albert Einstein recognized that
this was inconsistent with special relativity and its prediction that
influences cannot travel faster than the speed of light. So, he sought a
new theory of gravitation that would be relativistically consistent.
Mercury's orbit did not match that predicted by Newton's law of
gravitation. Some astrophysicists predicted the existence of an
undiscovered planet (Vulcan) that could explain the discrepancies. When
Einstein formulated his theory of general relativity (GR) he focused on
Mercury's problematic orbit and found that his theory added a
correction, which could account for the discrepancy. This was the first
time that Newton's theory of gravity had been shown to be inexact.

Since then, general relativity has been acknowledged as the theory that
best explains gravity. In GR, gravitation is not viewed as a force, but
rather, objects moving freely in gravitational fields travel under their
own inertia in straight lines through curved spacetime – defined as the
shortest spacetime path between two spacetime events. From the
perspective of the object, all motion occurs as if there were no
gravitation whatsoever. It is only when observing the motion in a global
sense that the curvature of spacetime can be observed and the force is
inferred from the object's curved path. Thus, the straight line path in
spacetime is seen as a curved line in space, and it is called the
ballistic trajectory of the object. For example, a basketball thrown
from the ground moves in a parabola, as it is in a uniform gravitational
field. Its spacetime trajectory is almost a straight line, slightly
curved (with the radius of curvature of the order of few light-years).
The time derivative of the changing momentum of the object is what we
label as "gravitational force".

Electromagnetic

Maxwell's equations and the set of techniques built around them
adequately describe a wide range of physics involving force in
electricity and magnetism. This classical theory already includes
relativity effects. Understanding quantized electromagnetic interactions
between elementary particles requires quantum electrodynamics (QED). In
QED, photons are fundamental exchange particles, describing all
interactions relating to electromagnetism including the electromagnetic
force.

Strong nuclear

There are two "nuclear forces", which today are usually described as
interactions that take place in quantum theories of particle physics.
The strong nuclear force is the force responsible for the structural
integrity of atomic nuclei, and gains its name from its ability to
overpower the electromagnetic repulsion between protons.

The strong force is today understood to represent the interactions
between quarks and gluons as detailed by the theory of quantum
chromodynamics (QCD). The strong force is the fundamental force mediated
by gluons, acting upon quarks, antiquarks, and the gluons themselves.
The strong force only acts directly upon elementary particles. A
residual is observed between hadrons (notably, the nucleons in atomic
nuclei), known as the nuclear force. Here the strong force acts
indirectly, transmitted as gluons that form part of the virtual pi and
rho mesons, the classical transmitters of the nuclear force. The failure
of many searches for free quarks has shown that the elementary particles
affected are not directly observable. This phenomenon is called color
confinement.

Weak nuclear

Unique among the fundamental interactions, the weak nuclear force
creates no bound states. The weak force is due to the exchange of the
heavy W and Z bosons. Since the weak force is mediated by two types of
bosons, it can be divided into two types of interaction or "vertices" —
charged current, involving the electrically charged W⁺ and W⁻ bosons,
and neutral current, involving electrically neutral Z⁰ bosons. The most
familiar effect of weak interaction is beta decay (of neutrons in atomic
nuclei) and the associated radioactivity. This is a type of
charged-current interaction. The word "weak" derives from the fact that
the field strength is some 10¹³ times less than that of the strong
force. Still, it is stronger than gravity over short distances. A
consistent electroweak theory has also been developed, which shows that
electromagnetic forces and the weak force are indistinguishable at a
temperatures in excess of approximately K. Such temperatures
occurred in the plasma collisions in the early moments of the Big Bang.

[1]
