Rotation or rotational/rotary motion is the circular movement of an
object around a central line, known as an axis of rotation. A plane
figure can rotate in either a clockwise or counterclockwise sense around
a perpendicular axis intersecting anywhere inside or outside the figure
at a center of rotation. A solid figure has an infinite number of
possible axes and angles of rotation, including chaotic rotation
(between arbitrary orientations), in contrast to rotation around a axis.

The special case of a rotation with an internal axis passing through the
body's own center of mass is known as a spin (or autorotation). In that
case, the surface intersection of the internal spin axis can be called a
pole; for example, Earth's rotation defines the geographical poles. A
rotation around an axis completely external to the moving body is called
a revolution (or orbit), e.g. Earth's orbit around the Sun. The ends of
the external axis of revolution can be called the orbital poles.

Either type of rotation is involved in a corresponding type of angular
velocity (spin angular velocity and orbital angular velocity) and
angular momentum (spin angular momentum and orbital angular momentum).

Mathematics

Mathematically, a rotation is a rigid body movement which, unlike a
translation, keeps at least one point fixed. This definition applies to
rotations in two dimensions (in a plane), in which exactly one point is
kept fixed; and also in three dimensions (in space), in which additional
points may be kept fixed (as in rotation around a fixed axis, as
infinite line).

All rigid body movements are rotations, translations, or combinations of
the two.

A rotation is simply a progressive radial orientation to a common point.
That common point lies within the axis of that motion. The axis is
perpendicular to the plane of the motion.

If a rotation around a point or axis is followed by a second rotation
around the same point/axis, a third rotation results. The reverse
(inverse) of a rotation is also a rotation. Thus, the rotations around a
point/axis form a group. However, a rotation around a point or axis and
a rotation around a different point/axis may result in something other
than a rotation, e.g. a translation.

Rotations around the x, y and z axes are called principal rotations.
Rotation around any axis can be performed by taking a rotation around
the x axis, followed by a rotation around the y axis, and followed by a
rotation around the z axis. That is to say, any spatial rotation can be
decomposed into a combination of principal rotations.

Fixed axis vs. fixed point

The combination of any sequence of rotations of an object in three
dimensions about a fixed point is always equivalent to a rotation about
an axis (which may be considered to be a rotation in the plane that is
perpendicular to that axis). Similarly, the rotation rate of an object
in three dimensions at any instant is about some axis, although this
axis may be changing over time.

In other than three dimensions, it does not make sense to describe a
rotation as being around an axis, since more than one axis through the
object may be kept fixed; instead, simple rotations are described as
being in a plane. In four or more dimensions, a combination of two or
more rotations about a plane is not in general a rotation in a single
plane.

Axis of 2-dimensional rotations

2-dimensional rotations, unlike the 3-dimensional ones, possess no axis
of rotation, only a point about which the rotation occurs. This is
equivalent, for linear transformations, with saying that there is no
direction in the plane which is kept unchanged by a 2-dimensional
rotation, except, of course, the identity.

The question of the existence of such a direction is the question of
existence of an eigenvector for the matrix A representing the rotation.
Every 2D rotation around the origin through an angle θ in
counterclockwise direction can be quite simply represented by the
following matrix:

    A =
[  cosθ -sinθ;  sinθ  cosθ ]

A standard eigenvalue determination leads to the characteristic equation

    λ^2 -2 λcosθ+ 1 = 0,

which has

    cosθ±i sinθ

as its eigenvalues. Therefore, there is no real eigenvalue whenever
cosθ≠±1, meaning that no real vector in the plane is kept unchanged
by A.

Rotation angle and axis in 3 dimensions

Knowing that the trace is an invariant, the rotation angle α
for a proper orthogonal 3×3 rotation matrix A is found by

    α=cos^-1(A_11+A_22+A_33-1/2)

Using the principal arc-cosine, this formula gives a rotation angle
satisfying 0≤α≤180^∘. The corresponding rotation axis must be defined
to point in a direction that limits the rotation angle to not exceed 180
degrees. (This can always be done because any rotation of more than 180
degrees about an axis m can always be written as a rotation
having 0≤α≤180^∘ if the axis is replaced with n=-m.)

Every proper rotation A in 3D space has an axis of rotation,
which is defined such that any vector v that is aligned with
the rotation axis will not be affected by rotation. Accordingly,
A v = v, and the rotation axis therefore corresponds to an
eigenvector of the rotation matrix associated with an eigenvalue of 1.
As long as the rotation angle α is nonzero (i.e., the
rotation is not the identity tensor), there is one and only one such
direction. Because A has only real components, there is at least one
real eigenvalue, and the remaining two eigenvalues must be complex
conjugates of each other (see Eigenvalues and eigenvectors#Eigenvalues
and the characteristic polynomial). Knowing that 1 is an eigenvalue, it
follows that the remaining two eigenvalues are complex conjugates of
each other, but this does not imply that they are complex—they could be
real with double multiplicity. In the degenerate case of a rotation
angle α=180^∘, the remaining two eigenvalues are both equal to −1.
In the degenerate case of a zero rotation angle, the rotation matrix is
the identity, and all three eigenvalues are 1 (which is the only case
for which the rotation axis is arbitrary).

A spectral analysis is not required to find the rotation axis. If
n denotes the unit eigenvector aligned with the rotation
axis, and if α denotes the rotation angle, then it can be
shown that 2sin(α)n=A_32-A_23,A_13-A_31,A_21-A_12. Consequently, the expense of an eigenvalue
analysis can be avoided by simply normalizing this vector if it has a
nonzero magnitude. On the other hand, if this vector has a zero
magnitude, it means that sin(α)=0. In other words, this vector will
be zero if and only if the rotation angle is 0 or 180 degrees, and the
rotation axis may be assigned in this case by normalizing any column of
A+I that has a nonzero magnitude.

This discussion applies to a proper rotation, and hence A = 1.
Any improper orthogonal 3x3 matrix B may be written as
B=-A, in which A is proper orthogonal. That is, any
improper orthogonal 3x3 matrix may be decomposed as a proper rotation
(from which an axis of rotation can be found as described above)
followed by an inversion (multiplication by −1). It follows that the
rotation axis of A is also the eigenvector of B
corresponding to an eigenvalue of −1.

Rotation plane

As much as every tridimensional rotation has a rotation axis, also every
tridimensional rotation has a plane, which is perpendicular to the
rotation axis, and which is left invariant by the rotation. The
rotation, restricted to this plane, is an ordinary 2D rotation.

The proof proceeds similarly to the above discussion. First, suppose
that all eigenvalues of the 3D rotation matrix A are real. This means
that there is an orthogonal basis, made by the corresponding
eigenvectors (which are necessarily orthogonal), over which the effect
of the rotation matrix is just stretching it. If we write A in this
basis, it is diagonal; but a diagonal orthogonal matrix is made of just
+1s and −1s in the diagonal entries. Therefore, we do not have a proper
rotation, but either the identity or the result of a sequence of
reflections.

It follows, then, that a proper rotation has some complex eigenvalue.
Let v be the corresponding eigenvector. Then, as we showed in the
previous topic, v̅ is also an eigenvector, and v + v̅
and i(v - v̅) are such that their scalar product vanishes:

    i (v^T + v̅^T)(v - v̅) = i (v^T v - v̅^T v̅ + v̅^T v - v^T v̅ ) = 0

because, since v̅^T v̅ is real, it equals its complex conjugate
v^T v, and v̅^T v and v^T v̅ are both representations
of the same scalar product between v and v̅.

This means v + v̅ and i(v - v̅) are orthogonal vectors. Also,
they are both real vectors by construction. These vectors span the same
subspace as v and v̅, which is an invariant
subspace under the application of A. Therefore, they span an invariant
plane.

This plane is orthogonal to the invariant axis, which corresponds to the
remaining eigenvector of A, with eigenvalue 1, because of the
orthogonality of the eigenvectors of A.

Rotation of vectors

A vector is said to be rotating if it changes its orientation. This
effect is generally only accompanied when its rate of change vector has
non-zero perpendicular component to the original vector. This can be
shown to be the case by considering a vector A⃗ which is
parameterized by some variable t for which:

d|A⃗|^2 dt=d(A⃗·A⃗) dt ⇒d|A⃗| dt=dA⃗  dt·Â

Which also gives a relation of rate of change of unit vector by taking
A⃗, to be such a vector: dÂ dt·Â = 0showing that dÂ dt
vector is perpendicular to the vector, A⃗.

From:

dA⃗ dt = d(|A⃗|Â) dt = d|A⃗| dtÂ+|A⃗|(dÂ dt),

since the first term is parallel to A⃗ and the second
perpendicular to it, we can conclude in general that the parallel and
perpendicular components of rate of change of a vector independently
influence only the magnitude or orientation of the vector respectively.
Hence, a rotating vector always has a non-zero perpendicular component
of its rate of change vector against the vector itself.

In higher dimensions

As dimensions increase the number of rotation vectors increases. Along a
four dimensional space (a hypervolume), rotations occur along x, y, z,
and w axis. An object rotated on a w axis intersects through various
volumes, where each intersection is equal to a self contained volume at
an angle. This gives way to a new axis of rotation in a 4d hypervolume,
where a 3D object can be rotated perpendicular to the z axis.

Physics

The speed of rotation is given by the angular frequency (rad/s) or
frequency (turns per time), or period (seconds, days, etc.). The
time-rate of change of angular frequency is angular acceleration
(rad/s²), caused by torque. The ratio of torque τ to the
angular acceleration α is given by the moment of inertia:
I = τ/α.

The angular velocity vector (an axial vector) also describes the
direction of the axis of rotation. Similarly, the torque is an axial
vector.

The physics of the rotation around a fixed axis is mathematically
described with the axis–angle representation of rotations. According to
the right-hand rule, the direction away from the observer is associated
with clockwise rotation and the direction towards the observer with
counterclockwise rotation, like a screw.

Circular motion

It is possible for objects to have periodic circular trajectories
without changing their orientation. These types of motion are treated
under circular motion instead of rotation, more specifically as a
curvilinear translation. Since translation involves displacement of
rigid bodies while preserving the orientation of the body, in the case
of curvilinear translation, all the points have the same instantaneous
velocity whereas relative motion can only be observed in motions
involving rotation.

In rotation, the orientation of the object changes and the change in
orientation is independent of the observers whose frames of reference
have constant relative orientation over time. By Euler's theorem, any
change in orientation can be described by rotation about an axis through
a chosen reference point. Hence, the distinction between rotation and
circular motion can be made by requiring an instantaneous axis for
rotation, a line passing through instantaneous center of circle and
perpendicular to the plane of motion. In the example depicting
curvilinear translation, the center of circles for the motion lie on a
straight line but it is parallel to the plane of motion and hence does
not resolve to an axis of rotation. In contrast, a rotating body will
always have its instantaneous axis of zero velocity, perpendicular to
the plane of motion.

More generally, due to Chasles' theorem, any motion of rigid bodies can
be treated as a composition of rotation and translation, called general
plane motion. A simple example of pure rotation is considered in
rotation around a fixed axis.

Cosmological principle

The laws of physics are currently believed to be invariant under any
fixed rotation. (Although they do appear to change when viewed from a
rotating viewpoint: see rotating frame of reference.)

In modern physical cosmology, the cosmological principle is the notion
that the distribution of matter in the universe is homogeneous and
isotropic when viewed on a large enough scale, since the forces are
expected to act uniformly throughout the universe and have no preferred
direction, and should, therefore, produce no observable irregularities
in the large scale structuring over the course of evolution of the
matter field that was initially laid down by the Big Bang.

In particular, for a system which behaves the same regardless of how it
is oriented in space, its Lagrangian is rotationally invariant.
According to Noether's theorem, if the action (the integral over time of
its Lagrangian) of a physical system is invariant under rotation, then
angular momentum is conserved.

Euler rotations

Euler rotations provide an alternative description of a rotation. It is
a composition of three rotations defined as the movement obtained by
changing one of the Euler angles while leaving the other two constant.
Euler rotations are never expressed in terms of the external frame, or
in terms of the co-moving rotated body frame, but in a mixture. They
constitute a mixed axes of rotation system, where the first angle moves
the line of nodes around the external axis z, the second rotates around
the line of nodes and the third one is an intrinsic rotation around an
axis fixed in the body that moves.

These rotations are called precession, nutation, and intrinsic rotation.

Astronomy

In astronomy, rotation is a commonly observed phenomenon; it includes
both spin (auto-rotation) and orbital revolution.

Spin

Stars, planets and similar bodies may spin around on their axes. The
rotation rate of planets in the Solar System was first measured by
tracking visual features. Stellar rotation is measured through Doppler
shift or by tracking active surface features. An example is sunspots,
which rotate around the Sun at the same velocity as the outer gases that
make up the Sun.

Under some circumstances orbiting bodies may lock their spin rotation to
their orbital rotation around a larger body. This effect is called tidal
locking; the Moon is tidal-locked to the Earth.

This rotation induces a centrifugal acceleration in the reference frame
of the Earth which slightly counteracts the effect of gravitation the
closer one is to the equator. Earth's gravity combines both mass effects
such that an object weighs slightly less at the equator than at the
poles. Another is that over time the Earth is slightly deformed into an
oblate spheroid; a similar equatorial bulge develops for other planets.

Another consequence of the rotation of a planet are the phenomena of
precession and nutation. Like a gyroscope, the overall effect is a
slight "wobble" in the movement of the axis of a planet. Currently the
tilt of the Earth's axis to its orbital plane (obliquity of the
ecliptic) is 23.44 degrees, but this angle changes slowly (over
thousands of years). (See also Precession of the equinoxes and Pole
Star.)

Revolution

While revolution is often used as a synonym for rotation, in many
fields, particularly astronomy and related fields, revolution, often
referred to as orbital revolution for clarity, is used when one body
moves around another while rotation is used to mean the movement around
an axis. Moons revolve around their planets, planets revolve about their
stars (such as the Earth around the Sun); and stars slowly revolve about
their galaxial centers. The motion of the components of galaxies is
complex, but it usually includes a rotation component.

Retrograde rotation

Most planets in the Solar System, including Earth, spin in the same
direction as they orbit the Sun. The exceptions are Venus and Uranus.
Venus may be thought of as rotating slowly backward (or being "upside
down"). Uranus rotates nearly on its side relative to its orbit. Current
speculation is that Uranus started off with a typical prograde
orientation and was knocked on its side by a large impact early in its
history. The dwarf planet Pluto (formerly considered a planet) is
anomalous in several ways, including that it also rotates on its side.

Flight dynamics

In flight dynamics, the principal rotations described with Euler angles
above are known as pitch, roll and yaw. The term rotation is also used
in aviation to refer to the upward pitch (nose moves up) of an aircraft,
particularly when starting the climb after takeoff.

Principal rotations have the advantage of modelling a number of physical
systems such as gimbals, and joysticks, so are easily visualised, and
are a very compact way of storing a rotation. But they are difficult to
use in calculations as even simple operations like combining rotations
are expensive to do, and suffer from a form of gimbal lock where the
angles cannot be uniquely calculated for certain rotations.

Amusement rides

Many amusement rides provide rotation. A Ferris wheel has a horizontal
central axis, and parallel axes for each gondola, where the rotation is
opposite, by gravity or mechanically. As a result, at any time the
orientation of the gondola is upright (not rotated), just translated.
The tip of the translation vector describes a circle. A carousel
provides rotation about a vertical axis. Many rides provide a
combination of rotations about several axes. In Chair-O-Planes the
rotation about the vertical axis is provided mechanically, while the
rotation about the horizontal axis is due to the centripetal force. In
roller coaster inversions the rotation about the horizontal axis is one
or more full cycles, where inertia keeps people in their seats.

Sports

Rotation of a ball or other object, usually called spin, plays a role in
many sports, including topspin and backspin in tennis, English, follow
and draw in billiards and pool, curve balls in baseball, spin bowling in
cricket, flying disc sports, etc. Table tennis paddles are manufactured
with different surface characteristics to allow the player to impart a
greater or lesser amount of spin to the ball.

Rotation of a player one or more times around a vertical axis may be
called spin in figure skating, twirling (of the baton or the performer)
in baton twirling, or 360, 540, 720, etc. in snowboarding, etc. Rotation
of a player or performer one or more times around a horizontal axis may
be called a flip, roll, somersault, heli, etc. in gymnastics,
waterskiing, or many other sports, or a one-and-a-half, two-and-a-half,
gainer (starting facing away from the water), etc. in diving, etc. A
combination of vertical and horizontal rotation (back flip with 360°) is
called a möbius in waterskiing freestyle jumping.

Rotation of a player around a vertical axis, generally between 180 and
360 degrees, may be called a spin move and is used as a deceptive or
avoidance manoeuvre, or in an attempt to play, pass, or receive a ball
or puck, etc., or to afford a player a view of the goal or other
players. It is often seen in hockey, basketball, football of various
codes, tennis, etc.
